---
title: "Mini: Go and its many uses"
permalink: /mini-go
custom_date: "231127"
---

# Mini: Go and its many uses

The word "go" has many uses in the Mini language:

- It means "to", "for", "towards":
    - mi i vole savi a ke i pasa go Tom. - I want to know what happened to Tom.
    - tu i da sujesi a ke go Tom? - What would you recommend to Tom?
    - joli-man i de labora o duro en en-i esita a junta ante ludi-man i de apara en patio go fini ludi de karera de mano-balo de Delauer tingi-sekola. - The cheerleaders worked hard to fire up the crowd before the players took the court for the final game of the Delaware high school basketball playoffs.
    - da e go tu. - That’s for you.
- It marks the future tense and "futurish" variants:
    - di viro i go paga a ale. - This gentleman will pay for everything.
    - mi i go en manja a oranje. - I will be eating an orange.
    - mi i go ave manja a oranje. - I will have eaten an orange.
    - mi i go ave en manja a oranje. - I will have been eating an orange.
- It's the verb "go":
    - se mi i kan go, mi i da go. - If I could go, I would.
- It composes with "i" to form the particle "go-i" which means "to" as in "to eat":
    - e no nese go-i dire ke si-feme e besonde piano-man. - It is not necessary to say that she is an excellent pianist.
- It also composes in the same way with "a", "e" when the following word is a noun or adjective:
    - go-a bon man, e su duro. - To be a good person is too hard.
    - si i kite a no mui go-e vole. - It leaves nothing much to be desired.
- It marks the exponent in the exponentiation operation:
    - fo go penta - 4^5.

## Notes

- [Mini resources](/mini-resources).
